Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. If there's such a thing as a science fiction
connoisseur, he would have to be a Jack Vance fan. Vance is a distinctive author
who's been writing science fiction and fantasy since the 1940s. And even in a
field like science fiction, Vance's imagination is remarkable. His depiction of
alien worlds, for instance, impresses any reader. He has a powerful, subtle
style, and with the colors and textures of his descriptions, and his careful
attention to the resources of language, he can make you believe you're on
another planet, somehow involved in an alien culture. We might mention the
Durdane Trilogy or the Four Novels of the Tschai or Planet of Adventure series as
examples of Vance's skill at creating alien environments and cultures. Vance
always wanted to be a writer, and he chose science fiction for the simplest of
reasons. Well, first, I toyed with the idea of my life. And I wanted to find
some way of making a living where I could travel, be my own boss, work my own
hours. And I knew writing was the way that suggested itself. And so I kind of,
even when I was old, maybe 10 or 12 years old, I kind of told myself I kind of
liked to be a writer. Why I chose science fiction, I don't know. Or fantasy,
whatever you want to call it. When I was a kid, I'd done a lot of reading. Well,
I've done a lot of reading and everything, as far as acting.
But I think I'm probably more touched by, or not influenced is the word, but
influenced, I guess you might say, by fantasy
and the so-called science fiction, rather than by much anything else. As we've
said, Vance started back in the 1940s, in the pulp magazines, and his early work
lacks the polish and distinctive flair that he's known for. I was learning my
traits. I just got started writing, not real young, you know, like some guys
did. In fact, I was doing lots of other things. And then I decided I was going
to be a writer, and I started writing. And I had old talibs for it, I guess,
apparently. But I didn't have the knack or the practice, or whatever you want to
call it, of putting the words together. And also, I was trying
to write the wrong kind of story. Those days, the gadget story was very big. And
I wasted a lot of time trying to write gadget stories on scientific
breakthroughs and things like that, which is essentially kind of a lined alley,
I think. And it's a phase of the field which has mercifully gone over the hill.
I've got a very good scientific background. It's not that I don't know science,
I do. I was going to be a physicist, actually, for a while. In the 40s and 50s,
I was writing and experimenting, collecting rejection slips. And that was an
apprentice period in which I
was paid not very much for, but, you know, checked once in a while. But
essentially, those 40 and 50 stories are not much good. They're not worth it.
I'll just soon forget them. Vance's apprenticeship must have been well spent.
The science fiction and fantasy he's been writing ever since is masterful. In
1963, he won the Hugo Award for The Dragon Masters. And in 1966, he won both the
Nebula and Hugo Awards for The Last Castle. Tomorrow, more with Jack Vance.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Goodさco.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. Jack Vance has created a unique, vivid, and
fascinating body of science fiction and fantasy. He began his career in the pulp
magazines of the 1940s, and he wrote the gadget stories that were popular then.
But over the years, he's developed a deeper, more subtle, and distinctive type
of science fiction and fantasy. Yet the curious fact is that not many people,
even science fiction readers, have heard of Jack Vance. We asked him why he
thought that was so. I think another thing, too, that I've developed rather
gradually and reached my presence, whatever you want to call it, by a kind of
back way, inconspicuously. I've never... Clark is known for 2001. Heinlein,
Stranger in a Strange Land, or whatever, children's books, or through Campbell.
And it's... It's... I've never been associated with anything that had any other
publicity attached to it. So I just seem to arrive on the scene. And so it seems
to me, if I were looking at my own career in this way, kind of quietly from...
from... from... northeast somewhere. Rather than... through... through having...
a... a movie or... or something or something. Lately, Vance has been writing
three, four, and even five novel series set on alien planets. He's noted for his
imaginative descriptions of alien settings and cultures more than anything else.
The four books in the Chai series, or the Dordain trilogy, are good examples of
stories set in convincingly alien environments. Vance is also recognized for the
stories in the Dying Earth series. And don't forget, Vance has written excellent
mystery fiction, even winning the Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of
America in 1960 for his book The Man in the Cage. Even though some readers talk
of a unique Vance style, Vance himself says he has no particular style or
writing characteristics. I don't have any style. All I do is try to write
whatever in the best possible way. Now, if you take the trouble to read some of
my murder mysteries, you'll find that they're written in a different way.
Everything you write, everything I write, everything anybody writes, the style
or the way the words are put together is part of the mood of the story. It is
part of the story itself. It's part of the completed product. Now, when you say,
how did I evolve this, that implies that I have one style that I use for
everything from this early Dying Earth thing up to one of this mystery story
with Locallum in the countryside out here called Fox Valley Murders. If you take
the trouble to examine the way the words are put together, you'll find it
totally different. Also, like in Bad Ronald, which is a suspense story, the way
that the words go together are different from the way the words go together. You
say, oh, I don't know what. No, I don't have any style.
Vance considers himself a storyteller or entertainer with no axes to grind. He's
reluctant to provide explanations or analyses of his work. When asked about a
particular character or episode in one of his works, Vance has a characteristic
reply. Well, I think everybody will have to answer that for themselves. Reading
the science fiction of Jack Vance makes answering questions like that
worthwhile. More with Jack Vance tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas. .
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. The dying Earth stories of Jack Vance, one
of the most exquisite creations in the realm of science fantasy. The setting for
the stories is a bit unusual. It's Earth, but an Earth so many millions of
centuries into the future that it's almost dead. And so is the sun, sputtering
like a candle ready to go out and bathing Earth in its final pale red light.
There are only a few people left on Earth, and most of these are sorcerers,
since magic works and science has been forgotten. Vance says that the dying
Earth stories are some of the earliest things he ever wrote. Well, the funny
thing about it is that was written before I'd started selling. That was written
at sea, as well as merchant sea. And I had quite a bit of a spare time, and I
began writing these flamboyant,
highly colored stories. But those were written, oh, very, very early. They were
written before I'd even started selling. So they're just representative of a
kind of rather early stage.
And then when I started writing this so-called gadget fiction or other stuff, I
changed the style. The style of this dying Earth stuff wasn't at all suitable
for writing the stuff I began selling. The stuff I was selling was any good,
because it wasn't. But at least the style of the dying Earth would have been
absolutely, what's
the word, incongruous. It wouldn't have fitted, so I used a different style.
Many readers believe the style of the stories, which Vance calls flamboyant and
highly colored, to be the most marvelous and vivid thing about them. It creates
an exotic yet wistful atmosphere, somehow appropriate for a world on the edge of
extinction. Tim Underwood is a friend of Vance's, and along with Chuck Miller,
publishes Vance's work in specially made collector's editions. The Underwood
-Miller Publishing Company's first book was The Dying Earth. We asked Tim
Underwood why. A lot of science fiction and fantasy, and sometimes the best of
it, does not get published in hardcover editions. And The Dying Earth was the
first book we did, and it was just a book that is essentially a classic. It was
published in 1950 as a paperback, and it had never been in hardcover. And it's
just one of the outstanding books in the fantasy field, and 200 years from now
people will be reading it. And it had never been in a durable hardcover edition,
and so we put it in one.
Vance didn't write any new Dying Earth material for 15 years after the book's
original publication in 1950. We asked him if it was perhaps reader responses,
which caused him to take it up again. No, it's been, I don't, I just always
wanted to do some more stuff in there. Uh, and this character was, uh, swarming
around in my head.
The character swarming around in his head was Kugel, a picaresque rogue who
survived on the dying earth through his wits and his nimble fingers. The Kugel
stories were collected in 1966 in a book entitled The Eyes of the Overworld.
Since then, Vance has written other Kugel stories and says he'll do more in the
future, so the dying earth isn't dead yet. More on Jack Vance tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. Jack Vance is one of the major talents that
the field of fantasy and science fiction has produced. Tim Underwood, his friend
and publisher, offers some reasons why. I think Jack has accomplished some
things with some of his works that have just never been done before. Not only in
terms of style, but in terms of feeling. And he hearkens to a certain spirit, I
think. I mean, a certain kind of person or a certain kind of spirit is on his
wavelength and responds strongly to his work. But the latter part of his work
and the best of his work is extremely well crafted. He's a craftsman, very well
written, and accomplishes a lot of really unusual things in a very quiet way.
Vance's accomplishments have been impressive. His science fiction career spans
almost 40 years and began back in the pulp era. He's won the major awards for a
science fiction and fantasy writer. One is the Hugo Award, awarded by readers,
and the other is a Nebula Award, given by other writers. Some of his best-known
work includes the Dying Earth stories, which go all the way back to his
beginnings as a writer in the 40s, and more recently the five Demon Princes
novels. Still, Vance hasn't received much recognition. We asked Underwood why.
My feeling is that one
responds strongly to Vance, one who feels much the same way about the world that
he does. And I think, why isn't he, though, as popular as, say, John Lycoray,
who I think people respond to in the same way? Well, Vance is more of a rarefied
taste, I think.
He's the kind of things that he feels are important. The strangeness in the
world about us and the unusual qualities of life itself, those kind of
considerations are not important to a lot of people. People who do feel these
things strongly are going to like what Vance writes. They're going to enjoy
reading. They're going to enjoy the worlds that he's created. He's not done a
lot of the things that make other writers successful, like he's never stayed
with one character, the way, let's say, Le Carré stayed with Smiley. Or the way
that someone writes a Doc Savage novel 15 times in a row or whatever. He hasn't
done that. And he hasn't had one hero that he's repeated for any great number of
books. And he hasn't had one contemporary theme that appeals to people, like the
battle of the sexes or something like that. Those aren't Jack's themes. Jack's
consideration themes are enormously subtle and kind of a rarefied nature. Vance
has always been reluctant to discuss his own work or to offer any insights into
his themes or intentions. Underwood suggests a reason. Jack always says that he
wants his work to stand for and by itself. I think he just wants to be
remembered for his work. He refuses to pick favorites among his work. I know he
likes his Demon Prince series a lot for good reason. He likes The Palace of
Love, which is the third in that series. He likes The Eyes of the Overworld, the
sequenced stories of the fellow Kugel. And that's partly because Kugel's a
rascal. And Vance himself is a bit of a rascal. And Kugel's even more so. He's
the kind of rascal that Vance would like to be if he wasn't such a nice guy at
heart.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
and Kugel's a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. In 1975, a science fiction and fantasy
publishing company was formed because two men wanted to get one particular
science fantasy book between hardcovers. Tim Underwood, one of the men,
explains. In 1975, I decided I wanted to publish a book. Specifically, I wanted
to publish The Dying Earth in a hardcover form. And I was a used book dealer,
and Chuck Miller was a used book dealer, dealing in rare and out-of-print books
and some new material. And we knew of each other. And I think we had bought and
sold books from each other from time to time. And Chuck heard about, I may have
mentioned in a letter about The Dying Earth. And Chuck offered his expertise
because he knew a good deal about certain parts of publishing industry, about
distribution and that end of it. And my experience, my limited experience, had
to do with just graphically putting a book together. And so he suggested that we
do the book together. And so we did. And the interesting thing is that we never
met each other until the book had already been published. And that was a year
later in 1976.
And up to that time, we were literally exchanging thousands of dollars through
the mail and doing business without ever having met each other. We were, in a
sense, complete strangers. But we had this one connection, and that is we both
felt strongly about this one work of Vance's The Dying Earth and about Vance's
work in general and specifically about fantasy and science fiction and horror
and literature. Since that first book, the Underwood Miller Company has
published some 50 books, all science fiction, fantasy, and horror. Their print
runs for each volume average 1,000 copies, hardly enough to compete with the
large New York publishers. Underwood explains why. We're selling to collectors,
and the collectors are buying these books with the knowledge that they're going
to go out of print and become valuable later on. Another reason is that Chuck
and I don't own a warehouse, and we are not in business to have a large
inventory. We would make more money if we printed more books, because as you
print more books, the cost per book of manufacturing goes down dramatically.
But we just simply can't afford to have a lot of books in inventory sitting
around. We can't afford... Our books go out of print in about nine months, and
this is just the opposite of a major manufacturer, like Dutton or Brown or
someone like that. They want their book to stay in print as long as possible,
and we want our books to go out of print as soon as possible.
Tim Underwood and Chuck Miller have a sincere interest in significant works of
science fiction and fantasy. It's not just the pleasure of bookmaking. Just the
pleasure. Chuck and I both take a great pleasure in making a good book, a book
that has its signature sewn, which is something that doesn't occur in general
trade hardcover publishing anymore, a book that's printed on acid-free paper so
that in 20 or 30 years the paper won't turn brittle and brown, and just a well
-made, well-bound book, attractively made and artistically put together. And
publishing a book like that, creating a book like that, is really a pleasure.
Underwood and Miller are publishing books by many authors in beautifully
illustrated editions now. Anyone who likes fantasy and science fiction, and
anyone who likes books, should search out some of their work and hold on to it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.